
                              C64 Tape Utilities
                             --------------------
                                   64TZXTAP
                                  ==========
                             TZX -> TAP Converter

                                  v0.03 beta

                                      by
                                  Tomaz Kac

  This utility will convert the C64  tapes  in  the  new TZX format to the .TAP
format used by the CCS64 emulator.
  The TZX format is a well-known format supported by  ZX-Spectrum  for  a  long
time  now  and it has also support for computers like Amstrad CPC, Jupiter ACE,
Enterprise and SAM Coupe, this  utility  and  its counter-part 64VOCTZX are the
first ones that support the format for Commodore 64 computer.
  The good side of the format is  that  it stores the data in its original form
and it can store  the  timing  and  encoding  information  that  is  needed  to
re-create the original recording.
  The  size  of  tapes  in .TZX format is basically the size of the data on the
tape itself.  So the 64k game  will  fit  into roughly 64k size TZX file (there
are some additional bytes taken by the timing info), while the .TAP  files  can
go into sizes of several MegaBytes (or several 100 kbytes ZIPped).
  That  is  not  all...  you can also store all kinds of other information like
Archive information, Machine info, Cover Scans, etc. in this format.

  Since this is BETA version it will only convert the files created by 64VOCTZX
converter, since only 3 data blocks are support for now.  Here is the  list  of
what is supported and what will come in future releases (if it is needed):

Supported blocks :

$16  (C64 ROM Loading block)
$17  (C64 Turbo Loading block)
$20  (Pause block)

Blocks $10 - $15 (used by other computers) will be supported if they are needed
in the future. Since those blocks are more ZX-Spectrum and Amstrad CPC specific.

Also other important blocks like GOTO, Loop, Call Sequence,  ...  are  not  YET
supported.  I will add support when there is a converter that will also support
these blocks, since it would be quite time consuming to add support for it.

  Usage :

     64TZXTAP FILE.TZX [OUTPUT.TAP]
    ----------

  No  command  line  switches  are necessary for the conversion.  There will be
warnings issued if some unsupported  blocks are encountered.  Otherwise it will
report number of blocks that were succesfully converted.

NOTE:  Utility 64VOCTZX makes another info block in the beginning  of  the  TZX
       file  which  is  there to identify the C64 tape.  That is the reason you
       will always have one block less  converted (or more than one) that there
       are actually in the tape !

  If you don't supply the OUTPUT filename then the INPUT filename will be used,
but the extension will be changed to .TAP .


HISTORY:  0.01 - * Initial release
          0.02 - * Sometimes a 'Waring - Some of the DATA might not be recogn.'
                   was printed for no reason.
          0.03 - * Now writes Version 1 TAP files (after many years)

  This is the last version of this program - because of the lack of support
by the C64 community the TZX implementation for C64 is discontinued.
                                                                             TC
