
                              C64 Tape Utilities
                             --------------------
                                   64VOCTZX
                                  ==========
                      TAP -> TZX & VOC -> TZX Converter

                                  v0.08 beta

                                      by
                                 Tomaz Kac ,
                                 Markus Brenner &
                                 Ben Castricum

  Some  time  ago  people  started  doing .TAP files for use with the excellent
CCS64 emulator by Hakan Sundell.   After  doing some investigating we tought we
can implement Commodore 64 tape support to  the  already  existing  TZX  format
which has some major improvements over the .TAP format :

  - TZX Files are A LOT smaller ... for example :
    average  64k  game  would  be  in .TAP format around 1.2 Mb long (zipped it
    would still be around 300k) long while  it is around 64k long .TZX format !
  - The data is exactly the same as  in  Commodore 64 after it is loaded so you
    can  do  hacking,  etc.  directly  on  TZX  file !  - All timings and other
    information is nicely stored in the TZX file.

  Unfortunetly you cannot use the  small  TZX  files on emulators yet, since no
C64 emulators support it so far,  but this might change in the future.  If  you
want  to  use  the .TZX file on an emulator you will have to convert it to .TAP
format first... you can do that with the 64TZXTAP utility which will convert it
back to .TAP format to use on CCS64 emulator.

  If you want to see what is inside the  TZX  file  you  can  use  the  PLAYTZX
utility  with  switches /info (or /one for less info) and it will print out the
information in EVERY block (including timing, encoding, etc.).

  Since the conversion to pure data  which  is  stored  in TZX format is not so
straightforward as conversion to .TAP format we have to know  the  loader  type
that  the  tape is using.  There are several types of loaders already supported
by the converter and new ones  are  being  added  frequently.  We need a lot of
help in finding out the timings and loader structure for  new  loaders  so  any
input is very welcomed.  If you would like to contribute to development of this
utility then please send us an email !

  Usage :

     64VOCTZX [switches] FILE.TAP | FILE.VOC [OUTPUT.TZX]
    ----------
Switches:

  /tresh n  Set Treshold value to n [0-255] (VOC  only)
            This will set the  'Treshold' to n.  By default the Treshold is set
            to 127 and should be good for most of the tapes.  However all sound
            cards don't produce very clean  signal  and it can shift up/down so
            you can set the treshold manually here...  the  valid  numbers  are
            from  0  to  255,  BUT  don't set it too much off 127, +- 10 should
            suffice !

  /pilot n  Set  Minimal Number of  ROM Pilot Waves  to n , if some blocks  are 
            detected as ROM blocks use higher  values  here.   Some  tapes  can
            have gaps in pilot tones and they will normally be regarded as more
            than  one ROM block... so you can set this setting to higher values
            than the ones reported  by  the  converter to prevent it converting
            bogus blocks.

  /zero  n  Set 'Zero' of TAP files to n (default 2550)
            This determines how big gap a $00 value in .TAP file is considered.
            Since it is not 100% clear how to handle  this  we  tought  we  can
            leave  it  so  it  can  be changed by the user.  The CCS64 emulator
            handles the zero $00  value  as  2550.   The $00 value is basically
            used as a pause in .TAP files.

  /rom n    First Read n ROM Saved blocks (default 4) ,  set this to  higher or
            lower  if  there  are  more/less  ROM blocks present.  Normally the
            tapes have 4 ROM blocks in front of them.

You will find detail  description  and  list  of  all loaders supported by this
utility in 64LOADER.TXT file (and also a list  of  other  un-supported  loaders
that  we  know  of).  Since this might help someone else out there who is doing
similar research we tought we would add it to this distribution.

  The following are the switches to convert these loaders to TZX format :

  /stt      Standard Turbo Tape
  /180      180 Loader
  /720      720 Degress Loader
  /ace      Ace of Aces Loader
  /joe      Players Loader
  /nova     NovaLoad
  /ocean n  Ocean/Imagine Loader Type n (1-3)
  /mast     Mastertronic Loader
  /ket      Kettle Loader
  /rain     Rainbird Loader
  /zoi      Zoids Loader

For description of these loaders please look in the 64LOADER.TXT file !

While  converting  there  will be some output on the screen for each block that
was converted (the output differs for  each  loader, since not all features are
supported by all loaders. This is what each of the column means :

1. Loader Name ( 5 character semi-name of the loader that is used in the block)
2. File  or  Block Name (some  blocks  have  filenames,  it  is  printed  here.
3. Len - Length of the block in bytes
4. Plt - Number of pilot pulses (or bytes)  -  ROM Loader has number of pulses,
   other loader have number of bytes in the pilot tone !
5. Trl - Number of trailing pulses (or bytes) -  Some blocks (like ROM Repeated
   blocks) use Trailing pulses ... the number is printed here.
6. Blk - Number of sub-blocks in this  block -  only for some loaders which use
   sub-blocks when loading. This is not so important
7. C - Checksum  (checked if OK , dot if not OK) - Some blocks use checksum  to
   tell  if  there  was  an  error  detected.   If  the block does not have the
   checksum then this field will be left blank.
8. E - Endianess  (M - MSB, L -  LSB) - Not so important, it means the order of
   the bits in one byte of data.
9. Pau - Pause after this block in seconds.

Not all loaders will have all these fields filled ...

Since there might be several problems while converting here  are  some  of  the
most common causes why conversion fails :

- Use only 8-bit MONO .VOC files when converting.  It is  BETTER  to  use  .TAP
  files  as source since you can first check them on an emulator to see if they
  work.
- If you are converting from .VOC  file then you can select threshold value for
  conversion (which is something emulators don't support) so  you  can  convert
  even files which won't work in the emulator !
- If  you  are  not sure what loader  a game uses try all possible loaders, you
  might get lucky and  find  which  one  works.  Especially for Mastertronic or
  Ocean games.
- If a loader is NOT supported and you know that the game you are converting is
  NOT available on the internet then you can send the game to us and we can try
  and support it in another version.


HISTORY:  0.01 - * (upto 0.06) Released to some beta-testers only.
          0.07 - * First public release.
          0.08 - * Added support for Version 1 TAP files (after many years)

  This is the last version of this program - because of the lack of support
by the C64 community the TZX implementation for C64 is discontinued.
                                                                             TC
