
                             ZXTape Utilities
                           --------------------
                VOC to TZX Direct Recording Block Converter
                                   v0.11b

                               by Tomaz Kac

  Sometimes when converting things to  TZX  format  you just can't get it right
whatever you do.  This utility can help you out then.  It will convert the  VOC
file  to  TZX  Direct  Recording  Block, which is basically the same as the VOC
block BUT it is  8  times  smaller.   Then  you  can  use utility like TAPER to
include the block that was not convertable into the real TZX file.

  Command Line Syntax:

DIRECT [switches] FILE.VOC [OUTPUT.TZX]

Switches: 

/start n - Conversion will start at the byte n in the VOC file.  You  must  use
           some  other  utility like CoolEdit to find out at which byte is what
           time.
/end   n - Conversion will end at the byte n in the VOC file.
/t     n - Sample rate in Z80 T-States per Sample.This will tell the utility to
           down (or up) sample the resulting  Direct  Recording  Block.   Again
           this  is not written in standard frequency Hz, but rather in the way
           it is written in TZX  file.   When  you start the conversion without
           this parameter it will tell you what frequency in Hz AND in T-States
           per Sample it is using.  Then, if you like to  have  your  DRB  even
           smaller  you  can divide the T-States value by 2 or some other value
           and use it with this switch...  if  you are lucky the resulting file
           will still work, but it will be even smaller!

  If OUTPUT.TZX is not given then the INPUT filename will be used, but its
extension will be changed to .TZX.

HISTORY:  0.11 - Some minor bugs removed, ANSI stuff removed as well, first
                 public release.


  My email is   tomcat@sgn.net   ... mail me if you have any problems
with this program.

                                                                            TC
